Received: 24 February 2025 / Accepted: 29 October 2025 © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2025
Lauren Hayward 22044191@sun.ac.za
Andries P. Engelbrecht engel@sun.ac.za
1 Computer Science Division, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South Africa
2 Department of Industrial Engineering, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South Africa
3 GUST Engineering and Applied Innovation Research Centre, Gulf University of Science and Technology, Mishref, Kuwait
Survey and analysis of metaheuristic search behavior characterization: a case study on particle swarm optimization variants
Lauren Hayward1 · Andries P. Engelbrecht1,2,3
Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0 https://doi.org/10.1007/s11721-025-00254-1
Abstract
Understanding of the underlying search processes of metaheuristics is often limited. Metaheuristic search behavior characterization has been proposed as an approach to improve knowledge and understanding of how metaheuristics function. Search behavior, which refers to the manner in which a metaheuristic searches the problem landscape, can be used to understand the impact of control parameters and search operators. To facilitate search behavior characterization, a survey of existing search behavior indicators is done to provide an overview of those that are available. A subset of the search behavior indicators is analyzed against two criteria using a case study of several particle swarm optimisation variants that have incremental structural differences. The first analysis criterion is whether the indicators are capable of distinguishing between different search behavior. It is found that some indicators cannot distinguish between different behavior, while the sensitivity of other indicators varies. The second criterion is whether the indicators are distinct from all other indicators. It is found that there are many indicators which are strongly correlated. However, there are some indicators which are distinct from all other indicators. From these results, it is determined which of the indicators can be recommended for future use to characterize metaheuristics in terms of search behavior, and suggested pairings of indicators are given.
Keywords Search behavior · Exploration-exploitation trade-off · Particle swarm optimization · Metaheuristics · Algorithm analysis
13


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
1 Introduction
There is often a scarcity of concrete evidence to explain why a metaheuristic performs as it does. This can be due to an absence of formal proofs of algorithmic improvements, the use of non-standardized algorithm descriptors obfuscating the design, or the implications of the no free lunch theorem (Wolpert & Macready, 1997). It is proposed that another contributing factor is that the underlying search processes of metaheuristics are themselves not well understood. It is known that the choice of search operator and control parameters are vital in determining whether a metaheuristic performs well or not (Eiben et al., 1999; Kennedy & Mendes, 2002; De Jong, 2007; Cleghorn & Engelbrecht, 2015; Engelbrecht, 2016; Harrison et al., 2018). Simultaneously, the choices of search operators and control parameters impact the search behavior of the metaheuristic, which is the manner in which the metaheuristic searches a problem landscape, implying that search behavior is a vital aspect of metaheuristics. Therefore, improved understanding of search behavior indirectly allows for more informed decisions when designing metaheuristics for a specific outcome.
Search behavior characterization is a means to improve this understanding, particularly through the use of search behavior indicators. These indicators are values which reflect aspects of search behavior. While not inherently meaningful, numerical values allow for differences in search behavior to be quantified. Several authors have already contributed to search behavior characterization, though it is often not referred to as such (Bersini et al., 1996; Schuurmans & Southey, 2001; Halim et al., 2006; Olorunda & Engelbrecht, 2008; Hansen et al., 2010; Zecchin et al., 2012; Krus & Ölvander, 2013; Bosman & Engelbrecht, 2014; Oliveira et al., 2014; Doerr et al., 2019; Ochoa et al., 2021; Cuevas et al., 2021; Hansen et al., 2021; Vermetten et al., 2022; Fyvie et al., 2023). Authors have increasingly started to include search behavior characterization in their analysis (Kennedy & Mendes, 2002; Peram et al., 2003; Alba & Dorronsoro, 2005; Adra & Fleming, 2011; Chen et al., 2019; Santana et al., 2022b, 2022a; Lavinas et al., 2022, 2024; Hayward & Engelbrecht, 2023; Riveros et al., 2024). However, nothing in the literature could be found that compared methods of search behavior characterization. Specific attention is drawn to the work of Hayward and Engelbrecht (2023), where search behavior characterization is used to determine the novelty of a host of popular nature-inspired metaheuristics. Using a number of search behavior indicators to compare search behavior, Hayward and Engelbrecht (2023) found that there is little novelty differentiating nature-inspired metaheuristics from the pre-existing metaheuristics in literature. The authors noted that adoption of search behavior characterization is unlikely, because there is no existing survey of search behavior indicators for metaheuristics. This prompts the contributions of this paper, in which the background of the aforementioned work is investigated in greater depth, in order to provide a robust foundation for future work in search behavior characterization. Given the importance of understanding search behavior, and the recent increase in interest in the use of search behavior characterization, it is deemed important to establish what search behavior characterization indicators are available, and which are the best to use.
This paper makes three significant contributions:
● The first is a comprehensive review of search behavior indicators for population-based metaheuristics which optimize unimodal, continuous domains. This review is novel in its depth and breadth, and provides a convenient collection of all search behavior indica
13
0 Page 2 of 33


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
tors found as a result of an extensive literature search and review. ● The second contribution is an analysis of the surveyed search behavior indicators using a case study of particle swarm optimisation (PSO) variants. The PSO variants are constructed with simple, incremental, quantifiable structural differences that are hypothesized to produce proportional differences in search behavior. The analysis evaluates the indicators against two criteria. For the first criterion, it is determined whether the indicators can distinguish between metaheuristics that exhibit different search behavior. It is found that there are some indicators which are sensitive to differences in behavior, some indicators are only sensitive to specific differences in behavior, and other indicators are not sensitive to any differences. For the second criterion, it is determined whether each indicator is distinct from all the other indicators. It is found that there are indicators which are distinct from all other indicators. It is also found that some indicators are highly correlated to other indicators, and some indicators are somewhat correlated to other indicators. Based on the results, certain indicators are not recommended for use. This contribution is novel, as no existing comparison of search behavior indicators exists, and this provides a basis for future work in search behavior characterization. ● The third contribution is a set of behavioral indicators that are recommended to be used for search behavior analysis of metaheuristics. These indicators are recommended given their performance during the analysis of the second contribution. General recommendations are given, as well as recommendations for specific analysis goals.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 very shortly summarizes any background knowledge that is required for the purposes of this paper. Existing methods of search behavior characterization are surveyed in Sect. 3. A methodology is used to select indicators for analysis in Sect. 4. The empirical procedure of the aforementioned analysis is given in Sect. 5, and the results are given in Sect. 6. Finally, Sect. 7 draws conclusions and discusses future work.
2 Background
This section briefly summarizes the related background knowledge that is required for this paper. Metaheuristics are shortly discussed in Sect. 2.1, with greater detail given for the metaheuristics relevant to this paper. Section 2.2 discusses metaheuristic search behavior. Section 2.3 gives an overview of existing metaheuristic analysis methods and frameworks.
2.1 Metaheuristics
Metaheuristics are a type of optimization algorithm that use search techniques that are independent from the optimization problem. Metaheuristics are designed to find near-optimal solutions, making them well-suited to optimize problems in which an exhaustive search is infeasible. Many well-known metaheuristics use techniques which are inspired by natural phenomena (Yang, 2010). Some of these may be referred to as a ‘metaheuristic framework’, which according to Sörensen and Glover (2018) is a family of metaheuristic instances that are based on a set of related concepts and strategies. This terminology differentiates between a single metaheuristic with set control parameters and search techniques, and
13
Page 3 of 33 0


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
the family of metaheuristics that can be created when varying the control parameters and techniques. Many popular metaheuristics are in fact metaheuristic frameworks, given how many derived forms of these metaheuristics have been published. Examples include particle swarm optimization (Kennedy & Eberhart, 1995), genetic algorithms (Fraser, 1957), ant colony optimization (Dorigo et al., 2006), genetic programming (Koza, 1994), evolutionary programming (Fogel, 1962), evolutionary strategies (Rechenberg, 1973), differential evolution (Storn & Price, 1997), and simulated annealing (Kirkpatrick et al., 1983). Of these, particle swarm optimization (PSO) is relevant to this paper. The PSO is a metaheuristic invented by Kennedy and Eberhart, inspired by flocking behavior in nature (Kennedy & Eberhart, 1995). Today, there are many variants of PSO, each tweaking the behavior of the original algorithm in some way (Kumar et al., 2016). While PSOs typically refer to ‘swarms’ and ‘particles’, this paper refers to a ‘population’ instead of a ‘swarm’, and an ‘individual’ instead of a ‘particle’, to keep language general to metaheuristics as a whole.
2.2 Search Behavior
For a metaheuristic to solve a problem, it must search through the problem landscape to find a good solution. Metaheuristics use various techniques to guide this search. The techniques and control parameters determine how the metaheuristic searches, which in turn determines its success or failure. A commonly discussed aspect of metaheuristic search behavior is exploration and exploitation (Eiben & Schippers, 1998). Exploration typically refers to the initial phase of the search process. The metaheuristic surveys a large portion of the problem landscape, with little significant information about the problem yet known. Conversely, exploitation typically refers to the latter phase of the search process. The metaheuristic intensely surveys a small portion of the problem landscape, chosen based on the information about the problem it has accumulated. Levels of exploration and exploitation are not directly set like parameters, but rather influenced through other choices of search techniques and control parameters. Application of selective pressure is associated with more exploitation, while less selective pressure is associated with more exploration (Črepinšek et al., 2013). One tool to apply selection pressure is information sharing. Population-based metaheuristics share information between the individuals as a key driver of the search process. A common method of adapting selective pressure on a PSO is the selection of a social neighborhood topology of the population (Lynn et al., 2018). A neighborhood topology determines which individuals in the population can share information with each other. The fewer the connections for information sharing, the less selective pressure is applied.
2.3 Metaheuristic analysis
While the focus of this paper is on search behavior indicators, there are many other methods through which metaheuristics can be analyzed. Such methods include structural or performance analysis and methods which are based on analyzing benchmark problems. These methods are parallel to search behavior-based analysis, as each has their own purpose and no single method is better than another. A short review of existing methods of metaheuristic analysis follows. This review is not intended to be complete, rather it intends to illustrate a few alternatives to the methods proposed in this paper.
13
0 Page 4 of 33


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
Structural analysis relates metaheuristics in terms of similarities in search operators and strategy parameters. There are several papers in which a formal methodology for the structural categorization of metaheuristics is established, with notable examples including the work of Sergienko et al. (2009) and Stegherr et al. (2022). Several other papers offer categorization models, as well as analysis of metaheuristics using these models (Molina et al., 2020; de Armas et al., 2022). Molina et al. (2020) define a categorization strategy which is used to compare the inspiration and the behaviour of over 300 metaheuristics. Similarly, de Armas et al. (2022) define a categorization strategy which is used to determine the structural similarity between 14 swarm-based metaheuristics. Performance analysis relates metaheuristics in terms of similar abilities to solve specific problems. Typically, any paper introducing a new metaheuristic or an adaptation to a metaheuristic must perform performance analysis. Rather than discuss individual performance analyses, guidelines and frameworks for performance analysis are reviewed. Several authors have provided instruction for performing robust and reproducible performance analysis of metaheuristics (Barr et al., 1995; Johnson, 2002; Beiranvand et al., 2017). In order to simplify the process of performing robust performance analysis, a number of performance analysis platforms have also been created (Bleuler et al., 2003; Bussieck et al., 2014; Hansen et al., 2021; Doerr et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2022; de Nobel et al., 2024). PISA was introduced in 2003 to improve the benchmarking of metaheuristics by compartmentalizing metaheuristic algorithm design into two independently executed parts (Bleuler et al., 2003). PAVER, first introduced in 2003 and rewritten in 2014, was created to automate the analysis of various performance metrics (Bussieck et al., 2014). A popular tool is the comparing continuous optimisers (COCO) benchmarking framework, first introduced by Hansen et al. (2021) in 2009. COCO aims to provide automated performance analysis by integrating into many different programming languages, and providing various statistical outputs. COCO also hosts an archive of previously executed results from over 300 metaheuristics, enabling broad performance analysis without re-implementation. IOHprofiler is a tool presented for the automated analysis of metaheuristic performance (Wang et al., 2022; de Nobel et al., 2024; Doerr et al., 2019). IOHprofiler consists of several modules performing different tasks, and integrates fully with the COCO system. It should be noted that analysis methods can overlap; for example, many of the functionality provided in COCO and IOHProfiler could be described as search behavior analysis. Finally, it must be mentioned that there are methods adjacent to metaheuristic analysis, such as methods of benchmark problem analysis, typically referred to as landscape analysis. Fitness landscape analysis (FLA) (Malan & Engelbrecht, 2013) and exploratory landscape analysis (ELA) (Mersmann et al., 2011) are examples of methods used to characterize benchmark problems. While these methods do not focus on metaheuristics, they are used in applications which serve to characterize metaheuristics (Mersmann et al., 2010; Bischl et al., 2012; Engelbrecht et al., 2021, 2022).
3 Survey of Search Behavior Indicators
Indicators used to characterize the search behavior of metaheuristics are reviewed in this section. This review is performed to encourage future use of search behavior characterization by creating a convenient collection of all known behavioral indicators. The reviewed
13
Page 5 of 33 0


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
indicators include both the fifteen discussed by Hayward and Engelbrecht (2023), as well as eleven additional indicators. Section 3.1 reviews indicators which characterize the entire search process in a single value. Section 3.2 reviews indicators which characterize only a portion of the search process. These types of indicators might change as the search process proceeds, such as indicators defined per iteration. Finally, Sect. 3.3 reviews indicators that are derived from complex data structures. For these indicators, data from the search process is first transformed by constructing some form of complex structure. The indicators themselves are then calculated based on the complex structure.
3.1 Single value indicators
Bosman and Engelbrecht (2014) define an indicator of metaheuristic search behavior named the diversity rate of change (DRoC). The DRoC indicator describes the search behavior of a PSO, specifically the trade-off between exploration and exploitation. DRoC can also describe the search behavior of any other population-based metaheuristic where the individuals are randomly initialized in the problem landscape, and converge on a single solution. This indicator makes use of the work of Olorunda and Engelbrecht (2008), who define the diversity of a PSO to be ‘the degree of dispersion of the particles in the swarm’, and compare various methods of measuring diversity. Every iteration, the DRoC indicator measures the mean distance between each individual and the center of mass of the population, and take the mean thereof. Diversity is then calculated as
D∗ = 1
n
∑n
i=1
√ √ √ √∑d
k=1
(xik − x ̄k)2 (1)
where n is the population size, d is the number of dimensions, xik is the kth dimension of the ith individuals position, and x ̄k is the average of the kth dimension over all individuals. A metaheuristic is run on an optimization problem, and the diversity of the population is measured at regular time intervals. By plotting the diversity measurements as time series data, a graph is formed. A two-piecewise linear approximation is calculated to fit this data, and the DRoC is the slope of the first of the two approximated lines. For the first international contest of evolutionary computation as reported by Bersini et al. (1996), three performance measures are proposed, the last of which can also be said to be an indicator of search behavior. This indicator is named the expected number of evaluations per success (ENES). The number of objective function evaluations for a number of runs is counted (NE), as well as the number of those runs that found an objective value satisfyingly close to an optimum (NS). ENES is calculated as follows:
ENES = NE
N S (2)
As a performance measure, ENES is particularly useful in that it takes into account unsuccessful runs, therefore decreasing bias towards only analyzing successful runs. As a measure of search behavior, ENES indicates the degree to which the evaluation of the objective function forms part of a metaheuristics search strategy. ENES has remained highly popular
13
0 Page 6 of 33


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
as a performance measure, and recently has been referred to as Expected Running Time (ERT) (Hansen et al., 2010; Mersmann et al., 2010). Hansen et al. adjust ENES to define ERT as follows:
ERT = N E(fbest ≥ ftarget)
N S (3)
where N E(fbest ≥ ftarget) is the total number of objective function evaluations before the fitness value reaches a given target value.
Based on Shannon’s information theory, Krus and Ölvander (2013) create a performance measure named the entropy rate index (ERI). The performance measure aims to characterize the convergence rate and robustness of an algorithm. ERI is calculated using:
ERI = d log2 ηx
Nm
(4)
where ηx is the acceptable delta that defines if an objective value is near enough to an optimum to be considered optimal, and Nm is the average number of objective function evaluations for m independent experiment runs. For a given benchmark problem, the numerator of Eq. (4) is constant, making the ERI measure equivalent to exclusively measuring the denominator Nm. This is then equivalent to ENES.
3.2 Changing-value indicators
Cuevas et al. (2021) propose a dimension-wise diversity index to characterize the effect of different search patterns on the behavior of an algorithm. Diversity is calculated each iteration using
D† = 1
d
∑d
k=1
1 n
∑n
i=1
|x ̄k − xik| (5)
The dimension-wise diversity index is used to calculate the percentage of the search effort spent exploring in a given iteration. This is referred to as XP L%, and is calculated using
XP L% =
( D†
D†max
)
× 100 (6)
where D† is the diversity at a single iteration, and D†max is the maximum diversity observed over the entire search process. The complement of XP L% is the percentage of the search effort spent exploiting the search space, and is named XP T %.
Zecchin et al. (2012) present four methods with which the algorithm search behavior of ant colony algorithms may be characterized. Though applied to ant colony algorithms, these methods generalize. The first two of these methods characterize how effective an algorithm is at reaching optimal or near optimal regions in the search space. The first of these is the fitness value of the best solution each iteration, and the second is the smallest distance
13
Page 7 of 33 0


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
between any solution and the optimal solution each iteration. The authors note that these indicators have been used by many others before them. The third proposed method characterizes how well an algorithm explores the search space as it converges on a final solution, which is effectively a measure of diversity. This is calculated by taking the mean distance between all possible pairs of solutions, and is called the mean population searching distance. The formula for the mean population searching distance is
D∥ = 2
n(n − 1)
∑n
i=1
∑n
j=i+1
∑d
k=1
|xik − xjk| (7)
where 2
n(n−1) is the number of unique pairs that exist in a population of size n, xik is the kth
dimension of the ith solution, and d is the number of dimensions.
The final method that is proposed by Zecchin et al. (2012) describes how optimization effort is split between feasible and infeasible space. Given that many search spaces have constraints, some solutions may exist outside of the constraints and therefore be infeasible. To measure how much of the search process is spent looking outside of the feasible area, the percentage of infeasible solutions generated in each iteration is counted. This measure is named F%.
Three methods of characterizing the performance of local search methods are defined by Schuurmans and Southey (2001). These methods are defined specifically for non-population-based metaheuristics optimizing discrete problems. The first proposed indicator is referred to as ‘Depth’, which is defined as the number of unsatisfied clauses in the current solution. ‘Depth’ quantifies how far along the optimization process is. The second proposed indicator is referred to as ‘Mobility’, which is calculated by measuring the Hamming distance between each new solution. ‘Mobility’ characterizes how quickly the problem landscape is explored through local search. The final proposed indicator is referred to as ‘Coverage’, which is calculated by measuring the reduction in the smallest Hamming distance between any two unexplored points in the problem landscape. ‘Coverage’ characterizes how completely the local search algorithm searches the problem landscape.
3.3 Indicators from complex data structures
The search trajectory network (STN) is proposed by Ochoa et al. (2021). The STN characterizes the paths through the problem landscape that are taken by the individuals of a metaheuristic. These paths are referred to as search trajectories. Potentially infinitesimal search trajectories are mapped to a series of ‘locations’ in discrete space. A single ‘location’ is a subset of the total problem landscape, relative to the size of the problem landscape, that is assigned a fixed fitness value. Each point in the problem landscape belongs to exactly one ‘location’. Because a ‘location’ contains many points in the problem landscape, this increases the chances of search trajectories overlapping. The STN is a graph that is constructed by combining the mapped search trajectories of the individuals into a directed graph. Multiple STNs may be combined to compare the trajectories of multiple metaheuristics. There are a number of indicators which can be calculated from a STN. These are:
● ntotal, the total number of nodes;
13
0 Page 8 of 33


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
● nbest, the number of nodes with the optimal fitness as their value;
● nshared, the number of nodes visited by more than one algorithm (given a merged STN); and ● best-strength, the normalized incoming weighted degree of the best node or nodes.
Vermetten et al. (2022) propose BIAS (bias in algorithms, structural), a benchmarking toolbox designed to identify structural bias in metaheuristics. Structural bias is defined as metaheuristic design components that tend metaheuristics to search in a specific direction in the problem space. The BIAS toolbox consists of a method of aggregating 39 statistical tests in order to detect structural bias, a machine learning model to detect the type of structural bias, and code to generate useful benchmark functions and visualization techniques. Given a sample dataset of the final position returned when executing a metaheuristic on a benchmark problems several times, the toolbox returns a prediction for the structural bias detected in the metaheuristic - either ‘bounds’, ‘center’, ‘clusters’, ‘discretization’, or ‘gaps’. This prediction could be considered a search behavior indicator. The toolbox is made available via a Python package, and requires an installation of R to function (van Stein & Vermetten, 2023). As mentioned in Sect. 2.3, COCO and IOHprofiler are benchmarking tools for the analysis of metaheuristics with a focus on performance (Hansen et al., 2021; Doerr et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2022; de Nobel et al., 2024). However, many of the ‘performance metrics’ provided in these tools are similar or equivalent to the other search behavior indicators surveyed. COCO consists of suites of benchmark functions, data logging and data processing facilities, as well as graph, HTML, and LaTeXgenerators to visualize the reported results. COCO is available in a number of coding languages, with entry points in C, C++, Java, Matlab, Octave, and Python. In terms of search behavior, COCO uses the ENES measure recently referred to as ERT (Bersini et al., 1996; Hansen et al., 2010). It also provides two different measures of success, one measuring ‘running length’ and the other ‘precision’. Both are measured by constructing empirical cumulative distribution functions from data gathered from a very large number of experiment runs. IOHprofiler provides similar characterization to COCO, along with expansive visualization and summarizing capabilities (de Nobel et al., 2024; Doerr et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2022). IOHprofiler is accessed via a web page, or through an R package. The interaction network (IN) is proposed by Oliveira et al. (2014). The IN characterizes communication between individuals in a metaheuristic, which is referred to as interaction. Interaction between individuals is a popular technique used by population-based metaheuristics. The IN creates a social network-like graph model of the population, where the nodes of the graph represent the individuals. Edges connect nodes that have interacted. Communication, or interaction, can refer to many things, and is loosely defined. Oliveira et al. (2014) define it to be the sharing of information. Information is shared between individuals when an individual uses the position of another individual as part of its position update strategy. An IN is defined by a series of matrices, the ‘swarm influence graph’ I, where the elements of I at iteration t are defined as seen below:
Itij =
{ 1 if ni(t) = j || nj(t) = i
0 otherwise (8)
13
Page 9 of 33 0


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
where ni(t) = j means that individual i interacts with individual j at time t. Equation (8) implies that communication is commutative.
The IN itself is an undirected weighted influence graph Itw, created by summing over all influence graphs in the time window [w : t], as illustrated in
Iw
t=
∑t
i=t−w+1
Ii, with t ≥ w > 0 (9)
The matrix Itw represents a graph, where values Itwij form edges between the nodes of i and j. The weight of the edge indicates how frequently the connected nodes communicated during the search in the given time window. By varying the time window, different analyses may be made. The comparison of two short windows at the start and end of the search process allows for the difference in information sharing during exploration and exploitation to be compared. Alternatively, by setting the time window to be the entire search process, the general communication habits of the algorithm may be analyzed. Oliveira et al. (2014) use several methods to analyze the INs. Heat maps are used to visualize the strengths of the edges between individuals. This visualization strikingly illustrates the difference in communication in different social topologies of metaheuristics. The incoming weight of the nodes, which is the total weight of all the edges attached to a node, are compared. The frequency and distribution of high-strength nodes for different social topologies are identified. Finally, the impact on the global structure of the graph is analyzed by removing edges in increasing order of strength. As edges are removed, disjointed subgraphs are created. This change is measured in two ways: the first is the size of the biggest subgraph, named the giant component (GC), and the second is the number of disjointed subgraphs, which is called the interaction diversity (ID). Both of these measures are found to be capable of illustrating the difference in different social topologies. It is found that a smaller GC indicates that the population is exploring, and a larger GC indicates that the population is exploiting. A small ID is present when there are many sub-populations performing independent search, which indicates exploration. Inversely, a large ID indicates exploitative behavior. Halim et al. (2006) propose a novel visualization software for search trajectories. The visualization method abstracts points in the search space in order to map movement through high-dimensional space. Using a number of visualization techniques, the authors propose that the tool can answer a variety of questions regarding metaheuristics. The questions describe aspects of search behavior such as the various factors in the exploration-exploitation trade-off.
Fyvie et al. (2023) mine information from search trajectories in order to explain the optimization methods of metaheuristics. Principal component analysis is used to project a high-dimensional problem space to three dimensions, and the solutions of each iteration are mapped to this lower dimensional space. The center of the lower-dimensional population is calculated, and the change in centroid for each iteration is measured. The acute angle between sequential centroids and the acute angle from origin to each centroid are proposed as measures of diversity. Fyvie et al. (2023) test their proposed measures by comparing them to existing diversity measures based on Shannon’s entropy (MacKay, 2003). A ‘global learning’ metric and
13
0 Page 10 of 33


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
a ‘local learning metric’ metric are used in the comparison. It is found that the ‘global learning’ metric is highly correlated to the angle from the origin. It is also found that the angle from the origin differs considerably between algorithms with different types of selection strategies, which indicates that the measure is capable of differentiating behavior. The comparison between ‘local learning’ and the angle between sequential centroids shows less conclusive results.
4 Indicator selection for analysis
This section selects search behavior indicators for testing and comparison amongst each other. To ensure that the indicators are comparable, a selection methodology is formalized in Sect. 4.1. This is followed by considering each group of indicators for selection. Given that many of the indicators reviewed in Sect. 3 are used in the work of Hayward and Engelbrecht (2023), the selection of indicators includes several indicators used by those authors. Specifically, all but three of those indicators are selected, with seven new indicators included. Section 4.2 considers single-value indicators, and Sect. 4.3 considers changingvalue indicators. Indicators from complex data structures are considered in Sect. 4.4, and additional indicators are included in Sect. 4.5, based on the already selected indicators.
4.1 Methodology
In order for the indicators to be comparable, there are a few considerations. These are:
1. the indicators should not require prior knowledge nor prior calculation beyond reasonable means; 2. it should be possible to compute the indicators; 3. the indicators should characterize a single run of an experiment; and 4. each indicator should describe a behavior of a population-based metaheuristic that optimizes continuous, unimodal domains, and converges on a single solution.
4.2 Single-value indicators
There are a number of diversity measures in literature. The DRoC indicator of Bosman and Engelbrecht (2014) is defined for the entire search process, and therefore can be selected. There are indicators which use objective function evaluations in their calculations, such as ENES (Bersini et al., 1996). ENES is defined for multiple runs of a search process, and requires modification to fit the methodology criteria. The modification made by Hansen et al. (2010) requires detailed knowledge of the problem landscape, namely knowing a target fitness value that is considered close enough to the known minima. In its original form, ENES represents the trade-off between computational cost and success. The ERT modification represents the expected amount of computational cost to reach an acceptable outcome. By taking these concepts and applying them to other data as detailed later in this section, new indicators can be created that reflect ENES and ERT.
ERI as created by Krus and Ölvander (2013) is in effect equivalent to ENES, and thus represented by the new ERT indicators described above.
13
Page 11 of 33 0


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
4.3 Changing-value indicators
The diversity-based indicator XP L% of Cuevas et al. (2021) is defined per iteration, and requires modification to be included for analysis. Given that it is already the notion of a percentage, it can be adapted by taking the mean of all XP L% to represent the entire search process. This is called EXP LORE%, and is calculated as
EXP LORE% =
∑T
t=1 XP L%t T
(10)
In order to modify changing-value indicators which are defined per iteration, the method of Hayward and Engelbrecht (2023) is used, albeit with an altered naming scheme. Hayward and Engelbrecht (2023) adapt indicators which are defined per iteration using the same technique used to calculate the DRoC indicator (Bosman & Engelbrecht, 2014). This technique is adopted because it has already been shown to work well characterizing the exploration and exploitation phases in metaheuristics (Dennis et al., 2021; Engelbrecht et al., 2022). The DRoC indicator aggregates time-series data by taking a two-piecewise linear approximation thereof. The two-piecewise linear approximation results in four indicators, namely the slope of two lines and the coordinates of a knee-point. The slope of the first line becomes the rate of change during exploration, called the ‘rate of change type A’. It follows that the slope of the second line becomes the rate of change during exploitation, called the ‘rate of change type B’. The knee-point represents a point of inflection in the data, where exploration changes to exploitation. The x-coordinate of the knee-point is called the ‘expected running time’ with respect to the data. The y-coordinate of the knee-point is called the ‘critical’ point with respect to the data. The construction of these indicators is illustrated in Fig. 1, where the relevant data can be substituted. All four of the characterizing measures proposed by Zecchin et al. (2012) are defined per iteration. The aggregation method described above is applied to the changing fitness value of the best solution. This results in four indicators, referred to as the fitness rate of change type A (FRoC Type A), fitness rate of change type B (FRoC Type B), ‘ERT-Fitness’, and ‘Critical Fitness’. The same aggregation method described above is applied to the changing distance between the best solution and the optimal solution. This results in four indicators, referred to as the separation rate of change type A (SRoC Type A), separation rate of change type B (SRoC Type B), ‘ERT-Separation’, and ‘Critical Separation’. The third measure proposed by Zecchin et al. (2012) is another form of diversity. Given the work done by Olorunda and Engelbrecht (2008) to determine which method of measuring diversity is best, and the inclusion of DRoC which uses Eq. (1) to calculate diversity, another diversity measure is not necessary.
The final indicator proposed by Zecchin et al. (2012), i.e. F %, can be modified to be defined for the whole search process by taking the mean of F % for all iterations. This is referred to as IN F EASIBLE%. The calculation of IN F EASIBLE% and Ft% are as follows:
IN F EASIBLE% =
∑T
t=1 Ft%
T
(11)
13
0 Page 12 of 33


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
and
Ft% = |sit ∈ S : si infeasible at t|
|S| × 100 (12)
where T is the total number of iterations, and in Eq. (12), S is the set of all individuals in the population.
The three indicators defined by Schuurmans and Southey (2001) are defined for nonpopulation-based metaheuristics optimizing discrete-valued problems. The modification of ‘Depth’ to be defined for continuous space would result in measuring the distance from the current best solution to a known optimum, which is the same as the second indicator proposed by Zecchin et al. (2012). The modification of ‘mobility’ would result in tracking the distance between consecutive best known solutions. This is aggregated using the twopiecewise linear approximation method, which results in indicators named the mobility rate of change type A, mobility rate of change type B, ‘ERT-mobility’, and ‘critical mobility’. Finally, the modification of ‘Coverage’ would require keeping track of of all visited points in the problem landscape, which is not feasible in continuous space, and so is excluded.
Fig. 1 The creation of indicators from the two-piecewise linear approximation aggregations method
13
Page 13 of 33 0


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
4.4 Indicators from complex data structures
While the indicators calculated by the STN are single-value indicators, Ochoa et al. (2021) specify for the creation of the STN that multiple runs of experiment data should be included in a single network. Despite this contradiction to the indicator selection methodology, the STN indicators are very interesting, and it would be beneficial to adapt the STN indicator to be included in the analysis. Given that none of the examples provided by the authors on the official STN code repository are for population-based algorithms, an adaptation is proposed for this study. For population-based algorithms, the adapted STN may be created by considering each individual in the population to be an independent run. That is, an STN graph will be created from the specific sequence of positions of each separate individual in the population. This allows for the calculation of the STN indicators, though of course these adapted indicators should not be compared to those calculated as prescribed by the authors. The STN indicators are included, appended with an asterisk to visually indicate the adaptation from their original version, namely ‘ntotal*’, ‘nbest*’, ‘nshared*’, and ‘best-strength*’. The detection of structural bias performed by the BIAS toolbox is unique amongst the other surveyed indicators (Vermetten et al., 2022). However, several runs are required to create a dataset from which the structural bias is predicted. Unlike the STN, an adaption for single runs is not possible, given that the predictive model requires sufficient data to make a prediction. Given this contradiction of the selection methodology, this indicator cannot be included. However, given the novelty of the BIAS toolbox, it is recommended outside of the scope of this paper.
COCO and IOHprofiler are powerful tools, but characterize using indicators very similar to those already selected for analysis. Furthermore, the novel analysis methods using the empirical cumulative distribution functions require several runs to compute. Given that this contradicts the selection methodology, these are not selected for analysis. However, given the extensive characterization provided by these tools, particularly the visualizations provided by IOHprofiler, these tools are recommended as alternatives to the methods used in this paper. The indicators calculated by the IN (Oliveira et al., 2014) can describe the entire search process, if the time window during the construction of the IN is set appropriately. The incoming edge-weight of the solution node can be included without modification. This indicator is referred to as the ‘solution node in-degree’ (SNID). The other two indicators, i.e. ID and GC, involve tearing down the IN and observing their values as the network is destroyed. Hayward and Engelbrecht (2023) aggregate ID and GC using the two-piecewise linear approximation method, while Oliveira et al. (2014) aggregate ID and GC by taking the mean of their observed values. The method used by Oliveira et al. (2014) is preferred. These indicators are included, and is referred to as ‘mean interaction diversity’ (Mean ID) and ‘mean giant component’ (Mean GC). Considering point 2 and point 1 of the methodology, the visualization-based indicators of Halim et al. are excluded. The indicators that can be extracted from the visualization techniques require expert knowledge to interpret, and can therefore not be computationally calculated.
The acute angle from the origin and the acute angle between sequential population centroids from the work of Fyvieet al. is excluded. Given that the indicators require principal
13
0 Page 14 of 33


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
component analysis of the problem landscape to project the landscape to lower dimensions, point 1 of the methodology is not satisfied.
4.5 New single-value indicators
In order to bring parity between the DRoC indicator and the indicators newly adapted using the the two-piecewise linear approximation aggregation method, the following is done. Going forward, DRoC is referred to as DRoC type A, while three new indicators named DRoC type B, ‘ERT-diversity’, and ‘critical diversity’ are also selected for the analysis.
5 Empirical procedure
This section provides details regarding the analysis of the search behavior indicators. To contextualize the analysis within the scope of the paper, Sect. 5.1 discusses the experiment pipeline. Section 5.2 discusses the research questions. Sections 5.3 and 5.4 detail the benchmark problems and metaheuristics used in the experiments, respectively. Data that is collected in order to calculate the indicators is detailed in Sections 5.5, and 5.6 explains how the indicators are calculated.
5.1 Experiment pipeline
To contextualize the survey of search behavior indicators in Sect. 3 and the subsequent selection of those indicators for analysis in Sect. 4 to the empirical procedure, a flowchart is given in Fig. 2. Figure 2 illustrates how the selection indicators are incorporated into the experiments that are described in Sect. 5 through the calculation of those indicators. Finally, it illustrates how the experiments are used to investigate research questions and draw conclusions.
5.2 Research questions
Given the number of indicators, it is unlikely that all are required to determine the search behavior of a metaheuristic. It becomes important to determine which of the indicators are the most useful. To do this, two research questions (RQ) are posed.
● RQ1 Does the indicator distinguish between metaheuristics exhibiting different search behavior? ● RQ2 Is the indicator distinct from all other indicators?
To test the indicators according to RQ1 and RQ2, experiments are conducted where metaheuristics are run against benchmark problems. During the experiments, data is collected to calculate the indicators. The indicators are analyzed using statistical tests, to determine the outcomes of the research questions.
13
Page 15 of 33 0


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
5.3 Benchmark problems
It is known that metaheuristic search behavior is landscape dependant (Engelbrecht et al., 2021). For this reason, it is important to test the indicators using benchmark problems that cover a wide array of landscape characteristics and problem classes. The benchmark suite described by Lang and Engelbrecht (2021) is chosen using exploratory landscape analysis (ELA) (Mersmann et al., 2011) to specifically cover as many landscape characteristics and problem classes with as few problems as possible, and is used in these tests . The benchmark suite totals 18 different problems, see the referenced paper for more details. The benchmark problems are fixed at 10 dimensions, with a single set of randomly generated starting positions for each problem, that all runs of all experiments will start from. Each metaheuristic is executed on each benchmark problem for 30 independent runs, with each run consisting of 1000 iterations.
5.4 Metaheuristics
In order to test whether an indicator is adept at differentiating between search behaviors, a ground truth of search behavior is required. While the specific behavior profile of a metaheuristic may not be known, with a degree of confidence it can be asserted when two specific metaheuristics are not likely to have similar behaviors. As a toy example, consider the expected difference in behavior from a metaheuristic which randomly initializes new positions, versus a gradient-based hill-climbing optimizer. The algorithm which randomizes
Fig. 2 Flowchart contextualizing how the surveyed indicators are selected and the used in the experiments, which ultimately allows for the analysis related to research questions
13
0 Page 16 of 33


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
positions is likely to explore more, and visit a larger area of the search space. A gradientbased hill-climbing algorithm will exploit more, but also use more computational power through the calculation of gradients. Given that these two algorithms exhibit very different behaviors, it is expected that a good behavioral indicator will highlight this.
In order to illustrate differences or similarities in behavior, six simple instances of the inertia weight PSO have been chosen, each with incremental, quantifiable structural differences (Shi & Eberhart, 1998). The first four metaheuristics are PSOs with different neighborhood topologies. These are the star topology (sPSO), ring topology (rPSO), the Von Neumann topology (vnPSO), and a topology where each individual has a random 20% of the population in its neighborhood (20PSO). An illustration of the topologies is given in Fig. 3. For performance comparisons of these social topologies, refer to the work of Kennedy and Mendes (2002). The fifth metaheuristic is a PSO with a star topology, where each individual takes up to three steps per turn, as long as the steps improve the fitness value. This effectively increases the length of the search trajectory in set intervals according to the increase in fitness, which can be compared to the work done by Peram et al. (2003). This is referred to as the greedy PSO (gPSO). The sixth metaheuristic is a PSO with a star topology, where every iteration a random 20% of the population are randomly re-initialized in the problem landscape. This is referred to as the re-initializing PSO (iPSO). For comparison on the effects of re-initialization see the work of Xie et al. (2002). Six different versions of the same metaheuristic framework are chosen in order be able to predict differences in behavior. For one, there are PSOs which only differ in social topology, other PSOs differ in only update function, while some PSOs differ in both social topology and update function. It can be expected that the behavioral differences between PSOs differing in both social topology and update function should be greater than those that differ in only one way. Secondly, the difference in search behavior will be greater between some social topologies than to others, due to the differences in social connectivity being more or less significant (Bosman & Engelbrecht, 2014). It can be expected that the behavioral difference between the vnPSO and the 20PSO will be smaller than the difference between the sPSO and the rPSO, due to the social connectivity being less significant in the former than the latter. Both of the aforementioned reasons allows for the analysis of the indicators to be validated against the intuition with which the PSOs have been chosen. Furthermore, by using metaheuristics from the same metaheuristic framework, it is easier to quantify the structural differences and predict the difference in search behavior. A summary of the chosen algorithms is given in Table 1. As it is known that the control parameters to metaheuristics influence search behavior (Cleghorn & Engelbrecht, 2015), the control parameters are fixed for all six PSOs. All
Fig. 3 The different neighborhood topologies of the PSOs included in the tests. A node represents an individual in a population, and an arrow indicates that the node at the end of the arrow is included in the neighborhood of the node at the origin of the arrow
13
Page 17 of 33 0


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
six metaheuristics have a fixed population size of 30 individuals, use the same velocity and position update equations with the same control parameters. The velocity update equation and the position update equation are
vik(t + 1) = w × vik(t) + r1ik (t)c1 × (pik(t) − xik(t))
+ r2ik (t)c2 × (gik(t) − xik(t)) (13)
and
xik(t + 1) = xik(t) + vik(t + 1) (14)
where xik(t) is the kth dimension of the ith individual at time t, and r1ik (t) and r2ik(t) are vectors of uniform random numbers in the range [0, 1] that are sampled each iteration. For all six metaheuristics, w = 0.9, c1 = 0.7, and c2 = 0.7, which satisfies stability constraints (Cleghorn & Engelbrecht, 2016).
5.5 Data collection
In order to calculate the various indicators, data must be logged. Certain values need to be logged once each iteration, along with the iteration value. These are:
● the diversity of the population according to Eq. (1); ● the fitness value of the currently best known solution;
● the best known solution’s distance from the known minima; and ● F % as per Eq. (12).
Other data is logged according to events. When the best known solution is updated, the distance between the old solution and the new solution should be calculated and logged with the iteration value. When an individual moves in the problem landscape, trajectory data must be logged. A trajectory means the starting and end position, as well as the fitness values and which individual is making the movement. Individuals are identified by index. When individuals share information among each other, then that interaction should be logged. Information sharing should be logged in an n × n relational matrix, where n is the population size.
At the end of the optimization process, the following data is logged:
● the total number of iterations;
● the index of the final solution in the population; and
Metaheuristic full name Abbreviation Star particle swarm optimization sPSO Ring particle swarm optimization rPSO Von neumann particle swarm optimization vnPSO 20% particle swarm optimization 20PSO Greedy particle swarm optimization gPSO Re-initializing particle swarm optimization iPSO
Table 1 Summary of the metaheuristics chosen to test whether the indicators distinguish between algorithms exhibiting different behaviors
13
0 Page 18 of 33


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
● the known optimal fitness value.
5.6 Calculation of indicators
Twenty-five indicators are selected for analysis. These are DRoC Type A, DRoC Type B, ERT-diversity, critical diversity, FRoC Type A, FRoC Type B, ERT-fitness, critical fitness, SRoC Type A, SRoC Type B, ERT-separation, critical separation, MRoC Type A, MRoC Type B, ERT-mobility, critical mobility, EXPLORE%, INFEASIBLE%, ntotal*, nbest*, nshared*, best-strength*, SNID, Mean ID, and Mean GC. The indicators are calculated from the data that is collected. The STN indicators are calculated using the ‘stnpy’ Python package1, which is based on the R package maintained by Ochoa et al.2. The IN indicators are calculated using a Python repository maintained by Oliveira et al.3. The code for the calculation of the rest of the indicators has been made available online, as well as the code used to conduct the experiments, raw results and the full processed results that are summarized in Sect. 64. The resources that have been made available allow for the replication of results from the research questions.
The two-piecewise linear regressions are calculated using the Python package pwlf (Jekel & Venter, 2019), which uses differential evolution to identify the breakpoints in the regression. While this method is fast, as it does not require testing every possible breakpoint, it is a stochastic method. The stochasticity raises concerns whether the calculation method affects the indicator values, i.e. whether the indicator value will change if the calculation is repeated several times. To determine whether the differential evolution method of regression calculation affects the indicator values, the coefficient of variation (CV) is used (Pearson, 1897). CV is chosen because it is independent of scale, which is beneficial because indicator values of different experiments may have different scales. CV is also regularly used to determine the reliability of apparatus used in the natural sciences (Shechtman, 2013), which is analogous to this task.
For each unique experiment run, every indicator calculated using the two-piecewise linear regression is recalculated 30 times. This results in a dataset of 30 values for each indicator value. CV is the ratio of the standard deviation of this dataset to the mean of this dataset. Details on how the CVs are calculated and the results are provided on GitHub[4]. The CV results are aggregated by indicator in Table 2 and tallied according to the number of CV values which are above specific thresholds. The intercept of each row and column gives the percentage of tests for which the indicator given by the row is greater than the CV given by the column.
CV is valued between zero and one, with greater magnitudes illustrating more significant variance in the sample. A CV of 0.01 represents a 1% average variation between results; similarly 0.05 relates to 5% variation, 0.1 relates to 10% variation, and 0.2 relates to 20% variation. Of the CV thresholds used in Table 2, a CV close to 0.01 is desired and only a CV greater than 0.2 is considered a concern. The majority of indicators have fewer than 2% of all CVr,i greater than 0.01. This indicates that for the majority of experiment runs,
1Available at https://pypi.org/project/stnpy/
2 Code at https://github.com/gabro8a/STNs
3 Code at h ttps: //git hub.co m/ma coj/s warm_ intera ctio n_network
4 Code at h ttps: //githu b.co m/r unrun Laur en/beh avio ur al_ bench mark ing/t ere/p aper_workings
13
Page 19 of 33 0


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
the indicator values remain very consistent with repeated calculation. Furthermore, these percentages decrease for each increasing threshold of CV. There are a few indicators which have a number of CVr,i above 0.2. These are FRoC Type B, SRoC Type B, MRoC Type A, MRoC Type B, ERT mobility, and critical mobility. While these values raise a concern, consider the number of experiment runs that are performed. All analysis is based on the results from thousands of experiment results. Considering this, a small number of results that might change would not affect the overall conclusion. Given the low number of CVr,i which are above 0.01, and even fewer that are above the higher thresholds, it is unlikely that the regression calculation method will affect the analysis. EXPLORE% is calculated according to Eq. (10), and INFEASIBLE% is calculated according to Eq. (11). For detailed explanations of the STN and IN indicators, refer to the relevant papers (Ochoa et al., 2021; Oliveira et al., 2014).
5.7 Limitations and considerations
Given the empirical procedure, there are some limitations that must be considered before the results are given. Consider that it is not known what correlation exists between metaheuristic search behavior and performance. Thus, the metaheuristics described in Sect. 5.4 are not compared in terms of their performance, because it cannot yet be established how this correlates to their differences in search behavior. It is however likely that there is some correlation, which is discussed as future work in Sect. 7. It should be noted that the results to be discussed are only valid given the context of the specific empirical procedure. Consider that the benchmark problems are all continuous and unimodal, despite covering a wide array of landscape characteristics. Also consider that the metaheuristics are all within the same metaheuristic framework, though this is intentional. Any conclusions are not necessarily valid outside of these benchmark problems and metaheuristics. It should also be considered that were the indicators calculated using different
Threshold of coefficient of variance values
% >0.01 % >0.05 % >0.1 % >0.2 DRoC Type A 0.62 0.43 0.37 0.28 DRoC Type B 1.20 0.59 0.40 0.28 ERT diversity 0.65 0.49 0.46 0.40 Critical diversity 0.86 0.37 0.19 0.00 FRoC Type A 1.42 1.17 1.14 0.86 FRoC Type B 6.79 5.49 4.97 4.35 ERT fitness 1.39 1.14 1.11 1.08 Critical fitness 1.39 0.99 0.77 0.49 SRoC Type A 1.91 1.57 1.54 1.27 SRoC Type B 7.47 5.96 5.62 5.37 ERT separation 1.45 1.33 1.30 1.30 Critical separation 1.39 0.56 0.28 0.09 MRoC Type A 8.83 8.52 8.27 7.47 MRoC Type B 7.47 6.51 6.11 4.88 ERT mobility 9.17 8.27 7.69 6.88 Critical mobility 7.35 6.17 5.49 3.73
Table 2 Aggregated summary of coefficient of variance for
indicators calculated from a twopiecewise linear regression when recalculated 30 times
13
0 Page 20 of 33


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
methods, were different research questions formulated, or different statistical tests used in the analysis, the conclusions could be different. While the empirical procedure has been established with the intentions of facilitating robust experimentation, all conclusions should by taken in the context of these limitations.
6 Results
This section answers the research questions by discussing the results of the experiments. RQ1 is answered in Sect. 6.1, where it is determined which of the indicators can distinguish between algorithms exhibiting different behaviors. RQ2 is answered in Sect. 6.2, where it is determined which indicators are distinct from all the other indicators. The research questions are summarized and recommendations regarding the selection of search behavior indicators are given in Sect. 6.3.
6.1 Does the indicator distinguish between metaheuristics exhibiting different behavior?
To determine whether the indicators distinguish between metaheuristics exhibiting different behavior, a two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test is used. The KS test compares two samples to determine whether they are likely drawn from the same underlying distribution. This test is chosen because it is a non-parametric test, which allows for the comparison of the different distributions of the various indicator result sets without concerns around testing for normality. The null hypothesis states that the two samples are drawn from the same distribution. The alternative hypothesis states that the two samples are not from the same distribution. The KS test is applied as follows. For every indicator, every benchmark problem, and every metaheuristic, a representative distribution is created from the results of the 30 experiment runs. Therefore, the distributions have a sample size of 30. Then, all permutations of unique metaheuristic pairs are formed. For each permutation of an indicator, benchmark problem, and pair of metaheuristics, the KS test is applied with a significance level of 0.05. With 25 indicators, 18 benchmark problems, and 15 possible pairs of metaheuristics, a total of 6750 KS tests are performed. The KS tests are summarized by tallying the number of times that the null hypothesis is not rejected for a given metaheuristic pair and indicator. This is then represented as a percentage over all tests. Given the large number of KS tests performed and the risk of Type I errors, a Bonferroni correction is applied. Because tests are grouped in families of size 18 for each metaheuristic pair and indicator, the significance level is corrected to 0.05
18 ≈ 0.00278.
Some metaheuristic pairs are expected to have more similar behavior than others. Metaheuristic pairs that differ in social topology and update function should be distinctly dissimilar, while metaheuristic pairs with only social topology or update function difference should be less dissimilar. Additionally, some differences in social topology or update function are more distinct than others. In terms of social topology, it is expected that sPSO should be most dissimilar to rPSO, and that 20PSO and vnPSO should be the most similar. In terms of update function, it is expected that iPSO should be highly dissimilar to all other metaheuristics, given that the constant injection of random positions is a completely distinct behavior.
13
Page 21 of 33 0


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
An indicator is deemed to successfully distinguish between metaheuristics exhibiting different behaviors if the null hypothesis is routinely rejected for pairs where different behavior is expected. The percentage of KS tests in which the null hypothesis is not rejected for each search behavior indicator and every pair of metaheuristics is visualized in Fig. 4. Every row represents a pair of metaheuristics, while every column represents a search behavior indicator. If the null hypothesis is not rejected, it indicates that the search behavior indicator could not identify a difference in search behavior between the pair of metaheuristics. Values colored in brown indicate that the metaheuristic pairs differ by both update function and social topology, while values colored in pink indicate that the metaheuristic pairs differ only by update function, and values colored in green indicate metaheuristic pairs that differ only in social topology. Light colors indicate that the search behavior indicator successfully distinguishes
Fig. 4 A heatmap summarizing the results of two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests. The figure gives the percentage of tests in which the null hypothesis is not rejected for each possible pair of metaheuristics and every search behavior indicator. Rows colored in brown indicate metaheuristic pairs that differ in both update function and social topology, rows colored in pink indicate metaheuristic pairs that differ only in update function, and rows colored in green indicate metaheuristic pairs that differ only in social topology. Lighter colors indicate that the null hypothesis is frequently rejected, while darker colors indicate that the null hypothesis is not frequently rejected. An indicator is capable of differentiating between different search behaviors if the null hypothesis is frequently rejected for metaheuristic pairs that are expected to differ in behavior
13
0 Page 22 of 33


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
between different search behavior, while dark colors indicate that the search behavior indicator is not successful in distinguishing between different search behavior. The metaheuristic pairs which differ in both social topology and update function are analyzed first. There are indicators which always reject the null hypothesis, such as SNID and EXPLORE%. There are indicators which very frequently reject the null hypothesis, such as ERT diversity, critical diversity, ntotal*, Mean ID, Mean GC, and INFEASIBLE%.
Other indicators reject the null hypothesis frequently, though not as frequently as the previously mentioned group. These are DRoC Type A, critical fitness, ERT separation, ERT mobility, and critical mobility. There are also indicators which are capable of differentiating between different behavior in some cases, but are incapable in others. These are DRoC Type B, FRoC Type B, critical separation, MRoC Type A, MRoC Type B, and nshared*. This might indicate that these indicators are good at differentiating between certain behaviors and not others. The results for the best-strength* indicator are unlike any other indicator, with the same moderate rate of failing to reject the null hypothesis for all metaheuristic pairs. This indicates that best-strength* is unlike the other indicators in some unknown capacity. Finally, FRoC Type A, ERT Fitness, SRoC Type A, SRoC Type B, and nbest* show consistently higher rates of failing to reject the null hypothesis.
Consider the metaheuristic pairs that differ only in update function. These results have higher rates of failing to reject the null hypothesis than the previous set of results. There are no indicators which always reject the null hypothesis for all metaheuristic pairs. However, there are indicators which always reject the null hypothesis for some metaheuristic pairs. Some of these have moderate rates for the other metaheuristic pairs, such as DRoC Type A, ERT diversity, critical diversity, and EXPLORE%. The rest of these indicators have high rates of failing to reject the null hypothesis for the other metaheuristic pairs, such as critical fitness, MRoC Type A, critical mobility, ntotal*, nshared, and INFEASIBLE%.
Some indicators have no cases in which they always reject the null hypothesis, but do have moderate rates of failing to reject the null hypothesis in all cases. These are MRoC Type B Mean ID, Mean GC, and SNID. Finally, the rest of the indicators show an inability to differentiate between behaviors, with moderate and high rates of failing to reject the null hypothesis. These are DRoC Type B, FRoC Type A, FRoC Type B, ERT fitness, SRoC Type A, SRoC Type B, ERT separation, critical separation, ERT mobility, nbest*, and best-strength*.
Furthermore, consider the three pairs of metaheuristics that differ by update function: gPSO - iPSO, sPSO - gPSO, and sPSO - iPSO. As already mentioned, it is expected that pairs with iPSO are more dissimilar than other pairs. This explains why a trend can be observed that the rates of failing to reject the null hypothesis are higher for sPSO - gPSO than for the other two pairs which contain iPSO. It is concerning that DRoC Type B and best-strength* do not follow this trend, because it implies that these indicators mistakenly distinguish between similar behavior.
Finally, consider the metaheuristic pairs that differ only in social topology. Overall, these results have the highest rate of failing to reject the null hypothesis. Given that rates of failing to reject the null hypothesis are so high, the analysis in this section pays particular attention to whether the rates follow expected patterns in terms of how similar the social topologies are. Generally, it can be seen that rates of failing to reject the null hypothesis are lowest for the metaheuristic pair that is most dissimilar, sPSO - rPSO. It can also be seen that the highest rates are seen for the pair that is most similar, 20PSO - vnPSO.
13
Page 23 of 33 0


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
There are only two indicators which infrequently fail to reject the null hypothesis; these are Mean ID and Mean GC. It is interesting that both indicators have a 0% rate for 20PSO - vnPSO, because it may indicate that these indicators are either very sensitive to social differences, or that their results are inconsistent. Future work regarding the consistency of indicator results is required.
There are indicators that perform well, though not as well as the previous group. Between metaheuristic pairs with greater social differences, these indicators show very low rates of failing to reject the null hypothesis, while in cases of smaller differences the rates are higher. These are ntotal*, nshared*. EXPLORE%, and INFEASIBLE%. There are also indicators which are moderately sensitive to social differences, and follow the trend of lower rates for greater social differences. These are critical diversity and best-strength. ERT diversity is only moderately sensitive in a few cases.
The other indicators show an inability to differentiate between different behavior. These are DRoC Type A, DRoC Type B, FRoC Type A, FRoC Type B, ERT fitness, critical fitness, SRoC Type A, SRoC Type B, ERT separation, critical separation, MRoC Type A, MRoC Type B, ERT mobility, critical mobility, nbest*, and SNID.
In order to better illustrate the sensitivities to search behavior differences that each indicator has, Table 3 is prepared. This table summarizes how sensitive each indicator is to either differences in update function, differences in social topology, or both differences simultaneously. A green block (G) indicates that the indicator is sensitive to the difference, blue blocks (B) indicate moderate sensitivity, yellow blocks (Y) indicate sensitivity only in
Table 3 Summarized levels of sensitivity shown by each indicator towards each type of structural difference
Indicator Update +
Social Update Social
DRoC Type A B G R DRoC Type B Y R R ERT Diversity G G Y Critical Diversity G G B FRoC Type A R R R FRoC Type B Y R R ERT Fitness R R R Critical Fitness B Y R SRoC Type A R R R SRoC Type B R R R ERT Separation B R R Critical Separation Y R R MRoC Type A Y Y R MRoC Type B Y B R ERT Mobility B R R Critical Mobility B Y R ntotal* G Y G nbest* R R R nshared* Y Y G best-strength* R R B Mean ID G B G Mean GC G B G SNID G B R EXPLORE% G G G INFEASIBLE% G Y G
Green blocks (G) indicate high sensitivity, blue blocks (B) indicate moderate sensitivity, yellow blocks (Y) indicate sensitivity in some cases, and red blocks (R) indicate no sensitivity
13
0 Page 24 of 33


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
some cases, and red blocks (R) indicate that the indicator is not sensitive at all to the differences. Furthermore, while it is not noted in the table, some results of specific indicators are inconclusive or confusing, such as those for DRoC Type B, Mean ID, Mean GC, and beststrength*. Future work is required to better understand these results.
6.2 Is each indicator distinct from all the other indicators?
When an indicator is distinct from all the other indicators, it implies that the indicator represents information that cannot be described through the other indicators. To determine whether each indicator is distinct from all other indicators, Pearson’s correlation coefficient (PCC) is used. A PCC is a value between −1 and 1, where −1 represents a perfect inverse linear relationship, 1 represents a perfect linear relationship, and 0 represents no linear relationship. There are limitations to PCC calculation, such as when all the values in one of the representative distributions are the same. In this case, the standard deviation is zero, and the PCC cannot be calculated. Preliminary data exploration finds that this limitation prevents the inclusion of all indicators in the investigation of RQ2. Specifically, the results of nbest* and best-strength* evaluate to a standard deviation of zero for many experiments. This prohibits the calculation of a PCC for the affected experiment between nbest*, best-strength*, and any other indicator. For this research question, these two indicators are hereafter excluded. The PCCs are calculated similarly to how the KS tests were performed. For each permutation of indicator, metaheuristic, and benchmark problem, a representative distribution is formed from the results of the 30 experiment runs. Then, for every unique pair of indicators, benchmark problem, and metaheuristic, the PCC is calculated between the two distributions. With 300 unique pairs of indicators, 18 benchmark problems, and 6 metaheuristics, 32400 PCCs are calculated. In order to aggregate the PCC values while retaining enough information to determine whether the indicators are distinct from one another or not, the following is done. For every pair of indicators, the PCC values for every function and metaheuristic are taken. This results in 108 PCC values. The average magnitude of the PCC values are taken from this set of values. These results are presented in Figure 5. Figure 5 represents every search behavior indicator by a row and a column which overlap along the diagonal. The PCC values for each indicator and every other indicator appear along this row and column, and the diagonal represents the perfect correlation between every indicator and itself. This visualization method allows for the PCC results to be read both row-wise and column-wise. Light colors indicate a low PCC, which implies that the search behavior indicators do not characterize the same search behavior information. Deep colors indicate a high PCC, which implies that the search behavior indicators do characterize the same search behavior information. For an indicator to be distinct from all other indicators, it should have light colors all along its row and column, other than for its self-correlation. For the purposes of identifying distinct search behavior indicators, weak PCC values are desirable. A weak PCC shows that the relevant pair of indicators characterize different search behavior, which makes them distinct from one another. There are widely accepted values of PCC that are used to establish the strength of a correlation (Hinkle et al., 2003). A PCC magnitude of less than 0.5 shows a weak correlation. A magnitude greater than 0.5 and less or equal to 0.7 shows a moderately strong correlation. A strong correlation is found when the magnitude of PCC is greater than 0.7 and less or equal to 0.9. A very strong correlation is found if the magnitude of PCC is greater than 0.9.
13
Page 25 of 33 0


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
To identify which indicator pairs are not distinct, only PCC magnitudes greater than 0.5 are discussed. The first group to be discussed are indicator pairs that have a moderately strong correlation. These are ntotal* and nshared* with a PCC magnitude of 0.55, ERT Diversity and EXPLORE% with a PCC magnitude of 0.55, ntotal* and EXPLORE% with a PCC magnitude of 0.56, ERT Mobility and Critical Mobility with a PCC magnitude of 0.57, SRoC Type B and Critical Separation with a PCC magnitude of 0.62, SRoC Type A and ERT Separation with a PCC magnitude of 0.66, and Mean ID and Mean GC with a PCC magnitude of 0.69. Many of these pairs of indicators are calculated from the same data, or are calculated from the same complex data structure. For indicators to be calculated from the same data means that the raw data used in the calculation of the indicators is the same, e.g. the diversity of the population is used by a number of indicators. The only pair of indicators with a moderately strong correlation that are neither calculated from the same data,
Fig. 5 A heatmap illustrating the mean Pearson coefficient correlation found between every possible pair of search behavior indicators
13
0 Page 26 of 33


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
nor from the same complex data structure, are ntotal* and EXPLORE%. Given that there is also a moderately strong correlation between EXPLORE% and ERT Diversity, it indicates that ntotal* characterizes the diversity of the population. There are also indicator pairs with a strong correlation. These are DRoC Type A and ERT diversity with a PCC magnitude of 0.76, FRoC Type A and ERT fitness with a PCC magnitude of 0.77, FRoC Type B and critical fitness with a PCC magnitude of 0.83, MRoC Type B and critical mobility with a PCC magnitude of 0.84, and DRoC Type B and critical diversity with a PCC magnitude of 0.86. All of the these pairs of indicators are calculated from the same data. In fact, all of these pairs are made of a rate of change type A indicator and an ERT indicator, or a rate of change type B and a critical value indicator. This trend is also observed among the indicator pairs with moderately strong correlation, namely SRoC Type A and ERT separation, and SRoC type B and critical value. This indicates that the same search behavior is characterized by a rate of change type A indicator and the corresponding ERT indicator of the same data. A similar conclusion is made for rate of change Type B indicators and their corresponding critical value indicators. There are no indicator pairs which have a very strong correlation.
6.3 Research questions concluded
By concluding the experiments, conclusions can be made regarding which indicators are recommended for use in characterizing metaheuristic search behavior. To answer RQ1, KS tests were used to determine which indicators distinguish between metaheuristics exhibiting different search behavior. The summarized results in Table 3 are used to identify which of the indicators meet this requirement. An indicator must be at least moderately sensitive in one difference category, and at least sensitive in some cases in another category to satisfy the requirement. The indicators which do not meet this requirement, and therefore are not recommended for use are DRoC Type B, FRoC Type A, FRoC Type B, ERT fitness SRoC Type A, SRoC Type B, ERT separation, critical separation, MRoC Type A, ERT mobility, nbest*, and best-strength*.
The results have shown that the remaining indicators are consistently sensitive to differences in search behavior in a variety of circumstances. These indicators are recommended for the characterization of metaheuristic search behavior. ERT diversity, critical diversity, ntotal*, Mean ID, Mean GC, INFEASIBLE%, and EXPLORE% are recommended for the characterization of search behavior stemming from a variety of structural differences. DRoC Type A, Critical Fitness, MRoC Type B, critical mobility, and SNID are recommended for the characterization of search behavior stemming from changes in update function. nshared is specifically recommended for the characterization of search behavior stemming from changes in social topology. To answer RQ2, PCC values were used to determine which indicators are distinct from one another. The results show that there are indicators which are correlated with one another. When selecting indicators to use for the characterization of metaheuristic search behavior, at most one of each pair of correlated indicators should be used. This ensures that the same search behavior is not being characterized by multiple indicators, which is redundant. Some of the correlated pairs contain indicators that are not recommended by the results of RQ1. Such correlations do not need to be considered, because the indicators which are not recommended will never be selected, and so will not cause redundancy. The remaining pairs are
13
Page 27 of 33 0


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
DRoC Type A and ERT diversity, ERT diversity and EXPLORE%, MRoC Type B and critical mobility, ntotal* and nshared*, ntotal* and EXPLORE%, and Mean ID and Mean GC.
With the research questions answered, recommendations follow regarding which indicators to use for the characterization of metaheuristic search behavior. RQ1 determines which of the indicators are good for search behavior characterization, and RQ2 determines which indicators should be used together. While obeying the redundancy limitations set by the results from RQ2, any combination of the indicator recommended for use by the results of RQ1 can be selected. The needs of the practitioner determine which indicators are selected. For a practitioner that wishes to characterize as many types of search behavior in as few indicators as possible, ERT diversity, critical diversity, critical fitness, critical mobility, nshared, Mean GC, and SNID , INFEASIBLE% are a selection. An alternative selection towards the same goal is DRoC Type A, critical diversity, critical fitness, MRoC Type B, and mean GC, SNID, EXPLORE%, INFEASIBLE%. One selection towards the goal of fully characterizing changes in social topology is critical diversity ntotal* Mean ID INFEASIBLE%, while a selection towards of the goal of fully characterizing changes in update function is ERT diversity, critical diversity, MRoC Type B, Mean GC, SNID. There are many more possible selections of indicators. The examples given illustrate how the desired outcome influences the indicator selection. The results of the research questions sketch a framework for the selection of indicators, that may be personalized as specific research requires.
7 Conclusion
The no free lunch theorem states that no metaheuristic is best-suited to all problems (Wolpert & Macready, 1997). It is assumed that for each problem, there are metaheuristics that are well-suited to solving the problem. This implies that the selection of a well-suited metaheuristic for a specific problem is a complex task. Increased understanding of metaheuristic search behavior is a component in the process of solving this task more efficiently. Search behavior characterization, through the use of search behavior indicators, is a means of increasing understanding of metaheuristics. Many authors have started to use search behavior characterization in their analysis (Alba & Dorronsoro, 2005; Santana et al., 2022b, a; Lavinas et al., 2022, 2024), and it has already been used to test the novelty of metaheuristics (Hayward & Engelbrecht, 2023). In order to lay a foundation for future work in search behavior characterization, two contributions were made. The first was a survey of search behavior indicators of greater depth and breadth than what currently exists. The second was an analysis of search behavior indicators in order to find which indicators are best suited for search behavior characterization. This type of analysis is the first of its kind, and consisted of two research questions. The analysis of the second contribution was prompted by two research questions. The first research question determined whether the indicators were capable of distinguishing between different search behaviors. The second research question determined whether the indicators were distinct from one another. Experiments were performed to collect data in order to analyze the search behavior indicators against the research questions. Six different metaheuristics were executed on 18 benchmark problems for 30 independent runs each. The
13
0 Page 28 of 33


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
six metaheuristics in the experiments were all of the same metaheuristic framework, namely particle swarm optimization (PSO), and all differ structurally in small but quantifiable ways. This was done in order to be able to predict expected search behavior differences, based on existing work in search behavior characterization (Bosman & Engelbrecht, 2014; Oliveira et al., 2014; Santana et al., 2022b). Data collected during the experiments was transformed through the calculation of the search behavior indicators, resulting in a large dataset of indicator values. The research questions were investigated using statistical tests performed on the dataset of indicator values. Two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests were used to answer whether the indicators were capable of distinguishing between different search behaviors. Pearson’s correlation coefficients were used to answer whether the indicators were distinct from one another.
The results of the first research question found that some indicators were incapable of distinguishing between different search behavior, while other indicators were found to be capable of distinguishing between different search behavior. The results of some indicators were erratic, either identifying similar behaviors as dissimilar, or vice versa. The erratic behaviour indicates that these indicators could be sensitive to noise in the data, or simply be too random for consistent analysis. It was also found that some indicators were only capable of distinguishing between different search behavior in specific circumstances, such as specific types of structural differences, or more significant structural differences. This indicates that some indicators are sensitive to some search behaviors, but not all. Indicators displaying selective sensitivity implies that the choice of search behavior indicator should be guided by the type of analysis to be done, such that indicators are selected which are sensitive to the types of metaheuristic differences being investigated. The results of the second research question found that there are indicators that are correlated to one another, indicating that those indicators characterize the same search behavior. It was often found that indicators calculated from the same data or data structure were correlated to each other, which is an intuitive outcome. The results also found indicators that were not correlated to any other indicators, implying that they characterize a unique search behavior. Based on the results, recommendations were given regarding the selection of indicators for search behavior characterization. General guidance was given on how to select indicators, and examples were given of indicators to select together. There is intended future work. Some future work relates to strengthening the conclusions that have been made. This includes answering the following questions:
● Do the results in this paper generalize over different types of benchmark problems? The benchmark problems used in this paper, though covering a wide array of landscape characteristics, are all single-objective, unimodal and continuous. It should be investigated whether the results still hold when the experiments are repeated for multi-modal, discrete, constrained or multi-objective benchmark problems. It should also be investigated which indicators require adaption to be calculated in the context of other types of benchmark problems.
● Do the results in this paper generalize over different metaheuristics? While the metaheuristics in this paper were chosen to illicit measurable differences in search behavior, they are all from the same metaheuristic framework. It should be investigated whether the results still hold when the experiments are repeated for metaheuristics that
13
Page 29 of 33 0


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
are not PSOs, as well as when metaheuristics are compared that are each from a different metaheuristic framework. ● What are the computational costs of the recommended indicators? In this paper, recommendations are given regarding which search behavior indicators to use. However, a significant factor in choosing indicators may be selecting those that use the least computational power to calculate. This motivates establishing the computational costs of each indicator, and comparing those indicators that are highly correlated in terms of which is least expensive to use. ● Are there better indicators to be discovered? It is highly likely that there exist superior indicators, and it would be highly beneficial to identify or discover these. There are also other techniques that could be investigated, such as other methods of calculating the linear regression-based indicators, such as spline interpolation or kernel regression.
Other future work involves investigating how search behavior indicators can be applied and used. This involves answering the following questions:
● How can search behaviour be used in control parameter sensitivity studies? These types of sensitivity studies typically compare control parameters to the performance, but using search behavior instead could prove valuable in understanding the reason for fitness changes. ● What is the correlation between search behavior, landscape characteristics, and performance? There has already been some work in this direction (Dennis et al., 2021; Engelbrecht et al., 2022). Much like the work using ELA to select metaheuristics for good predicted performance (Mersmann et al., 2011; Bischl et al., 2012), search behavior indicators could be used with landscape characteristics to predict which metaheuristics would perform well on a given problem, based on their search behavior. This involves establishing classes of metaheuristics based on search behavior indicator values, and finding a correlation between the performance of these equivalence classes on benchmark problem equivalence classes, which are established through landscape characterization.
Author contributions This paper forms part of the thesis of L.H. under the supervision of A.P.E. The original concept comes from A.P.E, with research and writing from L.H. The manuscript has been reviewed by both authors.
Funding No funds, grants, or other support was received for this body of work.
Data availability All data and code required for the replication of the results in this paper can be obtained through this GitHub repository branch: h ttps: //git hub.co m/ru nrunL auren /behav iour al_be nchma rking/ tree /pa p er_workings
Declarations
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
13
0 Page 30 of 33


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
References
Adra, S. F., & Fleming, P. J. (2011). Diversity management in evolutionary many-objective optimization. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 15(2), 183–195.
Alba, E., & Dorronsoro, B. (2005). The exploration/exploitation tradeoff in dynamic cellular genetic algorithms. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 9(2), 126–142.
Barr, R. S., Golden, B. L., Kelly, J. P., et al. (1995). Designing and reporting on computational experiments with heuristic methods. Journal of Heuristics, 1, 9–32. Beiranvand, V., Hare, W., & Lucet, Y. (2017). Best practices for comparing optimization algorithms. Optimization and Engineering, 18, 815–848.
Bersini, H., Dorigo, M., Langerman, S., et al. (1996). Results of the first international contest on evolutionary optimisation. In Proceedings of international conference on evolutionary computation (pp. 611–615). IEEE . Bischl, B., Mersmann, O., Trautmann, H., et al. (2012). Algorithm selection based on exploratory landscape analysis and cost-sensitive learning. In Proceedings of the 14th annual conference on Genetic and evolutionary computation (pp. 313–320).
Bleuler, S., Laumanns, M., Thiele, L., et al. (2003). Pisa—A platform and programming language independent interface for search algorithms. In Evolutionary multi-criterion optimization: Second international conference, EMO 2003, Faro, Portugal, April 8–11, 2003. Proceedings 2, Springer (pp. 494–508). Bosman, P., & Engelbrecht, A. (2014). Diversity rate of change measurement for particle swarm optimisers. In Proceedings of the international conference on swarm intelligence (pp. 86–97). Springer.
Bussieck, M. R., Dirkse, S. P., & Vigerske, S. (2014). Paver 2.0: An open source environment for automated performance analysis of benchmarking data. Journal of Global Optimization, 59, 259–275.
Chen, S., Bolufé-Röhler, A., Montgomery, J., et al. (2019). An analysis on the effect of selection on exploration in particle swarm optimization and differential evolution. In Proceedings of the congress on evolutionary computation (pp. 3037–3044).
Cleghorn, C., & Engelbrecht, A. (2016). Particle swarm optimizer: The impact of unstable particles on performance. In Proceedings of the symposium series on swarm intelligence (pp. 1–7). IEEE.
Cleghorn, C., & Engelbrecht, A. (2015). Particle swarm variants: Standardized convergence analysis. Swarm Intelligence, 9(2), 177–203.
Črepinšek, M., Liu, S., & Mernik, M. (2013). Exploration and exploitation in evolutionary algorithms: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 45(3), 1–33.
Cuevas, E., Becerra, H., Escobar, H., et al. (2021). Search patterns based on trajectories extracted from the response of second-order systems. Applied Sciences, 11(8), 3430.
de Armas, J., Lalla-Ruiz, E., Tilahun, S., et al. (2022). Similarity in metaheuristics: A gentle step towards a comparison methodology. Natural Computing, 21(2), 265–287.
De Jong, K. (2007). Parameter setting in EAs: A 30 year perspective (pp. 1–18). Springer.
de Nobel, J., Ye, F., Vermetten, D., et al. (2024). IOHexperimenter: benchmarking platform for iterative optimization heuristics. Evolutionary Computation, 32(3), 205–210. Dennis, C., Ombuki-Berman, B. M., & Engelbrecht, A. (2021). Predicting particle swarm optimization control parameters from fitness landscape characteristics. In Proceedings of the congress on evolutionary computation (pp. 2289–2298). IEEE.
Doerr, C., Ye, F., Horesh, N., et al. (2019). Benchmarking discrete optimization heuristics with iohprofiler. In Proceedings of the genetic and evolutionary computation conference companion. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, p 1798–1806. Dorigo, M., Birattari, M., & Stutzle, T. (2006). Ant colony optimization. IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine, 1(4), 28–39.
Eiben, A., Hinterding, R., & Michalewicz, Z. (1999). Parameter control in evolutionary algorithms. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 3(2), 124–141.
Eiben, A., & Schippers, C. (1998). On evolutionary exploration and exploitation. Fundamenta Informaticae, 35(1–4), 35–50.
Engelbrecht, A. P. (2016). Particle swarm optimization with crossover: A review and empirical analysis. Artificial Intelligence Review, 45, 131–165.
Engelbrecht, A., Bosman, P., & Malan, K. (2021). The influence of fitness landscape characteristics on particle swarm optimisers. Natural Computing, 21(2), 335–345.
Engelbrecht, A. P., Bosman, P., & Malan, K. M. (2022). The influence of fitness landscape characteristics on particle swarm optimisers. Natural Computing, 21(2), 335–345. Fogel, L. (1962). Autonomous automata. Industrial Research, 4(2), 14–19. Fraser, A. (1957). Simulation of genetic systems by automatic digital computers. Australian Journal of Biological Sciences, 10(4), 484–491.
13
Page 31 of 33 0


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
Fyvie, M., McCall, J., Christie, L., et al. (2023). Towards explainable metaheuristics: Feature extraction from trajectory mining. Expert Systems, 42(1), e13494.
Halim, S., Yap, R., & Lau, H. (2006). Visualization for analyzing trajectory-based metaheuristic search algorithms. Swedish Institute of Computer Science: Tech. rep. Hansen, N., Auger, A., Finck, S., et al. (2010). Real-parameter black-box optimization benchmarking 2010: Experimental setup. Tech. Rep. RR-7215, INRIA.
Hansen, N., Auger, A., Ros, R., et al. (2021). Coco: A platform for comparing continuous optimizers in a black-box setting. Optimization Methods and Software, 36(1), 114–144.
Harrison, K. R., Engelbrecht, A. P., & Ombuki-Berman, B. M. (2018). Self-adaptive particle swarm optimization: A review and analysis of convergence. Swarm Intelligence, 12, 187–226.
Hayward, L., & Engelbrecht, A. (2023). Determining metaheuristic similarity using behavioural analysis. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 29(1), 262–274.
Hinkle, D., Wiersma, W., & Jurs, S. (2003). Applied statistics for the behavioral sciences (Vol. 663). Houghton Mifflin Boston. Jekel, C. F., & Venter, G. (2019). pwlf: A python library for fitting 1d continuous piecewise linear functions. h ttps: //git hub.co m/cj ekel/ piece wise_l inea r_fi _tpy.
Johnson, D. S. (2002). Experimental analysis of algorithms. Data structures, near neighbor searches, and methodology: Fifth and sixth DIMACS implementation challenges: Papers related to the DIMACS challenge on dictionaries and priority queues (1995–1996) and the DIMACS challenge on near neighbor searches (1998–1999) 59:215.
Kennedy, J., & Eberhart, R. (1995). Particle swarm optimization. In Proceedings of the international conference on neural networks (pp. 1942–1948). IEEE.
Kennedy, J., & Mendes, R. (2002). Population structure and particle swarm performance. In Proceedings of the congress on evolutionary computation (Vol. 2, pp. 1671–1676).
Kirkpatrick, S., Gelatt, C., & Vecchi, M. (1983). Optimization by simulated annealing. Science, 220(4598), 671–680. Koza, J. (1994). Genetic programming as a means for programming computers by natural selection. Statistics and Computing, 4(2), 87–112.
Krus, P., & Ölvander, J. (2013). Performance index and meta-optimization of a direct search optimization method. Engineering Optimization, 45(10), 1167–1185.
Kumar, A., Singh, B., & Patro, B. (2016). Particle swarm optimization: A study of variants and their applications. International Journal of Computer Applications, 135(5), 24–30.
Lang, R. D., & Engelbrecht, A. P. (2021). An exploratory landscape analysis-based benchmark suite. Algorithms, 14(3), 78.
Lavinas, Y., Aranha, C., & Ochoa, G. (2022). Search trajectories networks of multiobjective evolutionary algorithms. In International conference on the applications of evolutionary computation (Part of EvoStar) (pp. 223–238). Springer.
Lavinas, Y., Ladeira, M., Ochoa, G., et al. (2024). Multiobjective evolutionary component effect on algorithm behaviour. ACM Transactions on Evolutionary Learning and Optimization, 4(2), 1–24.
Lynn, N., Ali, M., & Suganthan, P. (2018). Population topologies for particle swarm optimization and differential evolution. Swarm and Evolutionary Computation, 39, 24–35. MacKay, D. (2003). Information theory, inference and learning algorithms. Cambridge University Press.
Malan, K. M., & Engelbrecht, A. P. (2013). A survey of techniques for characterising fitness landscapes and some possible ways forward. Information Sciences, 241, 148–163. Mersmann, O., Bischl, B., Trautmann, H., et al. (2011). Exploratory landscape analysis. In Proceedings of the conference on genetic and evolutionary computation (pp. 829–836).
Mersmann, O., Preuss, M., & Trautmann, H. (2010). Benchmarking evolutionary algorithms: Towards exploratory landscape analysis. In Proceedings of the international conference on parallel problem solving from nature (pp. 73–82). Springer. Molina, D., Poyatos, J., Ser, J. D., et al. (2020). Comprehensive taxonomies of nature-and bio-inspired optimization: Inspiration versus algorithmic behavior, critical analysis recommendations. Cognitive Computation, 12, 897–939.
Ochoa, G., Malan, K., & Blum, C. (2021). Search trajectory networks: A tool for analysing and visualising the behaviour of metaheuristics. Applied Soft Computing, 109(C), 107492. Oliveira, M., Bastos-Filho, C., & Menezes, R. (2014). Towards a network-based approach to analyze particle swarm optimizers. In Proceedings of the symposium on swarm intelligence (pp. 1–8). IEEE.
Olorunda, O., & Engelbrecht, A. (2008). Measuring exploration/exploitation in particle swarms using swarm diversity. In Proceedings of the congress on evolutionary computation (pp. 1128–1134). IEEE. Pearson, K. (1897). The chances of death, and other studies in evolution (Vol. 2). E. Arnold.
Peram, T., Veeramachaneni, K., & Mohan, C. (2003). Fitness-distance-ratio based particle swarm optimization. In Proceedings of the swarm intelligence symposium (pp. 174–181).
13
0 Page 32 of 33


Swarm Intelligence (2026) 20:0
Rechenberg, I. (1973). Evolution strategy: Optimization of technical systems by means of biological evolution. Fromman-Holzboog, 104(1), 15–16.
Riveros, M., Rojas-Morales, N., Montero, E., et al. (2024). Understanding search trajectories in parameter tuning. In Proceedings of the genetic and evolutionary computation conference. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, pp. 778–786.
Santana, C., Keedwell, E., & Menezes, R. (2022a). Networks of evolution: Modelling and deconstructing genetic algorithms using dynamic networks. In Proceedings of the genetic and evolutionary computation conference companion (pp. 459–462).
Santana, C., Oliveira, M., Bastos-Filho, C., et al. (2022b). Beyond exploitation: Measuring the impact of local search in swarm-based memetic algorithms through the interactions of individuals in the population. Swarm and Evolutionary Computation, 70, Article 101040.
Schuurmans, D., & Southey, F. (2001). Local search characteristics of incomplete sat procedures. Artificial Intelligence, 132(2), 121–150.
Sergienko, I., Hulianytskyi, L., & Sirenko, S. (2009). Classification of applied methods of combinatorial optimization. Cybernetics and Systems Analysis, 45, 732–741.
Shechtman, O. (2013). The coefficient of variation as an index of measurement reliability (pp. 39–49). Springer.
Shi, Y., & Eberhart, R. (1998). A modified particle swarm optimizer. In Proceedings of the international conference on evolutionary computation (pp. 69–73). Sörensen, K., & Glover, F. (2018). A history of metaheuristics. In F. Marti, P. Pardalos, & M. Resende (Eds.), Handbook of heuristics. Springer International Publishing.
Stegherr, H., Heider, M., & Hähner, J. (2022). Classifying metaheuristics: Towards a unified multi-level classification system. Natural Computing, 21(2), 155–171.
Storn, R., & Price, K. (1997). Differential evolution: A simple and efficient heuristic for global optimization over continuous spaces. Journal of Global Optimization, 11(4), 341–359. van Stein, N., & Vermetten, D. (2023). Basvanstein/bias: v1.1 deep-bias toolbox. Vermetten, D., van Stein, B., Caraffini, F., et al. (2022). Bias: A toolbox for benchmarking structural bias in the continuous domain. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 26(6), 1380–1393.
Wang, H., Vermetten, D., Ye, F., et al. (2022). Iohanalyzer: Detailed performance analyses for iterative optimization heuristics. ACM Transactions on Evolutionary Learning and Optimization, 2(1), 1–29.
Wolpert, D., & Macready, W. (1997). No free lunch theorems for optimization. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 1(1), 67–82.
Xie, X. F., Zhang, W. J., & Yang, Z. L. (2002). Hybrid particle swarm optimizer with mass extinction. In International conference on communications, circuits and systems and West Sino expositions (Vol. 2; pp. 1170–1173).
Yang, X. (2010). Nature-inspired metaheuristic algorithms. Luniver Press.
Zecchin, A., Simpson, A., Maier, H., et al. (2012). Improved understanding of the searching behavior of ant colony optimization algorithms applied to the water distribution design problem. Water Resources Research,48(9).
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
13
Page 33 of 33 0